Dividing a square into similar rectangles (or, equivalently, tiling a square with similar rectangles) is a problem in mathematics.


== Three rectangles ==

There is only one way (up to rotation and reflection) to divide a square into two similar rectangles.
However, there are three distinct ways of partitioning a square into three similar rectangles:
The trivial solution given by three congruent rectangles with aspect ratio 3:1.
The solution in which two of the three rectangles are congruent and the third one has twice the side length of the other two, where the rectangles have aspect ratio 3:2.
The solution in which the three rectangles are all of different sizes and where they have aspect ratio ρ2, where ρ is the plastic number.The fact that a rectangle of aspect ratio ρ2 can be used for dissections of a square into similar rectangles is equivalent to an algebraic property of the number ρ2 related to the Routh–Hurwitz theorem: all of its conjugates have positive real part.


== Generalization to n rectangles ==
In 2022, the mathematician John Baez brought the problem of generalizing this problem to n rectangles to the attention of the Mathstodon online mathematics community.The problem has two parts: what aspect ratios are possible, and how many different solutions are there for a given n. Frieling and Rinne had previously published a result in 1994 that states that the aspect ratio of rectangles in these dissections must be an algebraic number and that each of its conjugates must have a positive real part. However, their proof was not a constructive proof.
Numerous participants have attacked the problem of finding individual dissections using exhaustive computer search of possible solutions. One approach is to exhaustively enumerate possible coarse-grained placements of rectangles, then convert these to candidate topologies of connected rectangles. Given the topology of a potential solution, the determination of the rectangle's aspect ratio can then trivially be expressed as a set of simultaneous equations, thus either determining the solution exactly, or eliminating it from possibility.As of March 2023, the following results (sequence A359146 in the OEIS) have been obtained for the number of distinct valid dissections for different values of n:


== See also ==
Squaring the square


== References ==


== External links ==
Python code for dissection of a square into n similar rectangles via "guillotine cuts" by Rahul Narain