In the digital humanities, "algorithmic culture" is part of an emerging synthesis of  rigorous software algorithm driven design that couples software, highly structured data driven design with   human oriented sociocultural attributes. An early occurrence of the term is found in Alexander R. Galloway  classic Gaming: Essays on Algorithmic CultureOther definitions include Ted Striphas' where AC refers to the ways in which the logic of big data and large scale computation (including algorithms) alters they culture is practiced, experienced and understood.". 
A starting point for modern discussion of culture is attributed to Edward Burnett Tylor in his 1871 works on primitive culture.The emergence and continuing development and convergence of computers, software, algorithms, human psychology, digital marketing and other computational technologies resulted in numerous AC variants including recommendation algorithms, AI generated stories and characters, digital assets (including creative NFTs, all of which can and should be considered as algorithmic culture artifacts. A similar process is occurring in strictly sociological interactions.


== Algorithmic Culture and ChatGPT ==
With the flourishing of LLMs, and particularly ChatGPT, algorithmic culture is increasingly visible within the academic mainstream. Jill Walker Rettberg at the University of Bergenis exploration applications of in her works. Some of the examples she uses are: How to use ChatGPT to get past writer's block, and examining society's biases and clichesGenerative AI, is a now prominent and fast evolving component of modern algorithmic culture. It is currently entering a period of accelerating growth, acceptance and use, with specific algorithms and tools including Midjourney DALL-E and Stable Diffusion.ChatGPT Plus, GPT-4 are increasing their sophistication in composing music, writing teleplays, fairy tales, stories, and poems. With user prompting also facilitating character specific speaking and writing styles. NovelAI, for example,  is an online AI-assisted story writer.


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Jonathan Cohn,  The burden of choice: Recommendations, subversion, and algorithmic culture, Rutgers University Press, 2019
Fernández Rovira Cristina and Santiago Giraldo Luque. Predictive Technology in Social Media. First edition First ed. CRC Press
Eran Fisher, Algorithms and Subjectivity: The Subversion of Critical Knowledge. First edition First ed. Routledge 2021
Gary Hall . Culture in Bits : The Monstrous Future of Theory. Continuum 2002
Hallinan B and Striphas T (2014) Recommend for you:The Netflix Prize and the production of algorithmic culture.  New Media & Society. Epub ahead of print 23 June 2014.
Levy S (2010) How Google's algorithm rules the web